**Computer Networking**

Computer networking can be defined as the interconnection of multiple computing resources and devices with the ability to exchange the data and sharing them with each other. There are multiple devices that make the use of the certain set of rules called as communication protocol to transfer the information between the devices connected in a network via the wired or wireless medium. The computer network is a very broad term that is used to describe multiple types of the network that you can use to connect the multiple devices. In today's world, networking is an essential part of the business and personal lives, from the super computers to the small wearable devices or the IOT devices which we use in our daily life.

**Computer Network Working**

The working of computer networking is based on the the size of the computer network and the purpose of the network. If you have a small network you will need less number of the resources and the required tools to manage the network. But if you have a large network you will need more resources and the tools to manage the network. In a network The nodes and The links are the basic building blocks of the computer network. The network nodes can be defined as the devices that are mainly data communication equipment (DCE) like modem, hub, switch or router and on the other side there are Data Terminal Equipment (DTE) such as two or more coputers and printers. As there are both DCE and DTE are there, there is something required to connect them too, here comes the role of the links. The links can be reffered to as the transmission media which is being used to connect the DCE and DTE. The links can be both wired like the twisted pair cable, coaxial cable, fiber optic cable or the wireless like the radio waves, microwaves, infrared waves etc. Each device has an IP address, which helps in identifying a device. The IP address is a unique address that is assigned to each device in a network.

**What do computer networks do?**

The computer networks were created at the time of late 1950s for the purpose of military and defense. The network was initially used for transmiting the data over the telephone lines and had limited commercial and its scientific applications. The computer networks in today's world deliver more than the connectivity to the users. These all things are a critical part of the business and the personal lives. In today's world the computer networks can:

- Operate Virtually: In Today's world the computer networks can be operated virtually from anywhere in the world, which allows the physical networking infrastructure that can be partitioned logically for creating multiple "Overlay Networks". In an overlay computer network, all the nodes in the network can be connected to each other and the data can be routed through multiple physical paths. There are multiple enterprise networks which are overlaid on the network.

- Integrate on Large Scale: The computer networks can be integrated on a large scale. In today's modern world networking services connect over the physically distributed over the computer networks. The services can optimize the network functions through automation and monitoring to create a large scale, high performance computer network. Networking services can be scaled up or down as per the requirement of the network.

- Respond Quickly to changing conditions: The computer networks can respond quickly to the changing conditions. In modern world, the computer networks can be programmed and managed centrally using the software, so the traffic can be routed and controlled centrally from a single location as it supports virtual traffic management.

- Provide Data Security: All the networking solutions comes with the security features like encryption and access control. There are many third party solutions like antivirus, firewalls and anti-malware can be integrated to make the network more secure.

**Core Components of Computer Networks**

The core components of the computer networks are:

- Network Devices: These are the physical devices or the nodes that are used to connect the multiple computers or the other network devices together inside a computer network. The network devices are also known as the network equipment or the computer networking devices. Example of network devices consists of Modems, Routers, PC's, Servers, Firewalls, Switches, Hubs and Bridges. Each devices has its own functionality and is identified by the network address often has easily recognizable or identifiable name.

- Links: A link can be considered as the transmission medium which is used to connect these multiple devices or nodes together and enabling the transmission of the data between them. The links can be both wired and wireless, like ethernet cable, fiber optic cable, radio waves, microwaves, infrared waves etc. These links can be configured in both ways, either physically or logically whereas the network topology dictates the way in which the links and nodes are related to each other in a network.

- Computer Network Protocols: These are the rules or protocols that all the nodes in a network which are communicating with each other should follow for the mean of proper communication. Common protocols include of TCP/IP (Transmission Control Protocol/Internet Protocol), IEEE 802, Ethernet/Fast Ethernet/Gigabit Ethernet, WLAN (Wireless Local Area Network) and cellular standards.

- Network Services: These are the services that are provided by the computer networks. These services can be of different types like the file sharing, data sharing, data transfer, data transmission, data communication, resource sharing, email, audio and video conferencing, voice over IP (VoIP), instant messaging, online gaming and many more.

**Types of Computer Networks**

- Local area Network (LAN): A Local area Network (LAN) is a computer network that is used to connect the computers and the other network devices with each other in a limited geographical area or a small area like a home, office, school, or a group of buildings. These kind of networks are owned, managed and maintained by small companies or a test network for a small-scale prototyping. LAN is usually less costly, as it is mostly build with an inexpensive hardware like hubs, network adapters and ethernet cables. The LAN's data transfer rate is very high, as it is used to transfer the data between the computers and the other network devices in a small area. The LAN's data transfer rate is usually 10 Mbps to 1 Gbps. These LAN's provides higher security and can be easily managed.

- Metropolitian Area Network (MANs): A MANs connect the multiple LANs and have their span over the larger geographical area network, such as big cities, states and countries. The government agencies use MANs to connect the citizens and private industries. In a MAN various number of LANs are connected to each other through a telephone exchange line. It has a higher range than a Local Area Network (LANs).

- Wide Area Network (WAN): A Wide area Network (WAN) is a computer network which is intended to extended over a large geographical area or a wide area. This kind of network multiple user which can be either individuals or the group of people's or multiple LAN's together. The WAN's are usually owned, managed and maintained by the government or the large companies. These large organizations use WAN's to connect their various sites, like the branch offices or the data centers, that are located in different geographical locations, remote employees, suppliers and customers together, so they can access there data and also run the applications from anywhere in the world. The WAN's are usually build with the expensive hardware like the routers, switches, modems, leased lines, satellites and the internet. Internet can be considered as the largest WAN in the world. These WAN's provides lower level of security and are difficult to manage as because of troubleshooting problems.

- Enterprise Network: An Enterprise Network is a kind of computer network, build for a large organization typically called as the enterprise. This needs to fulfill exacting requirements of the enterprise. As networking is a crucial part of the business, as it helps in functioning, making the whole networks highly available, scalable and robust. The enterprise networks have the tools enabling the network engineers and operators to design, create and managing the networks while debugging, troubleshooting and optimizing the network. These enterprise networks provides high level of security and are easy to manage.

- Storage Are Network (SANs): The Storage area networks is a special and dedicated kind of network which is used to connect the multiple high-performance data storage devices and their resources. As is it a dedicated network, it is used to provide block-level storage to the other forms of the data storage with higher levels of security. A SAN is purposefully designed to provide the disaster recovery because it consists of multiple storage devices that are connected to each other and can be accessed by the multiple servers at the same time. These SANs include many kinds of storage devices, such as disk drives, magnetic tapes and optical storages.

- Service Provider Network: These are the networks which operate WAN's to provide the connectivity to individual users and organizations. These services may offer services like the simple connectivity, in the form of the leased lines or more advanced managed services to the enterprises. The service provider also supplies the internet and celluler connectivity to their users. Here the providers typically consists of the telecommunication companies, internet service providers (ISP's), cable companies and mobile network operators.

- Personal area Network (PANs): A personal area network (PANs) is used by a single person to connect multiple devices together, like printers and scanners. The range of PAN is typically 10 meters. There are two types of PAN's, Wired Personal Area Network and Wireless Personal Area Network. The wired personal area network is used by connecting the devices with the help of the cables, whereas the wireless personal area network is used by connecting the devices with the help of the wireless technologies like the bluetooth, infrared, ZigBee, Z-Wave, UWB (Ultra Wide Band), RFID (Radio Frequency Identification) and NFC (Near Field Communication).

- Campus Area Network (CANs): A Campus area network is a collection of interconnected LANs in a limited geographical area. The campus area network is used to connect the multiple buildings like the offices, schools, colleges, universities, hospitals, military bases, government agencies and many more.

- Virtual Private Network (VPNs): A Virtual Private Network extends a private network over the public network via a dedicated interconnection between the the both which helps the data to flow through a tunnel to improve the privacy and and security of a network connection.

- Passive Optical Network (PONs): A Passive Optical Network is a kind of fiber-optic network which is used to bring the fiber cabling and signals to the end user. The PON's are used by the telecommunication companies and the internet service providers to provide the fiber-to-the-premises (FTTP) services to the end users.

- Cloud Networks: A cloud networks is a kind of a WLAN, but its infrastructure is owned and managed by the cloud service providers like Amazon Web Services(AWS), Micrsoft Azure or Google Cloud Platform. This is an standard approach to build and manage the mordern networks. These all network resources include virtual routers, firewalls, bandwidths and network management tools are provided by the cloud service providers.

- WLANs: Also called as wireless local area network, is a kind of computer network in which users can connect to a local area network (LAN) through a wireless connection using the radio waves. The WLANs provide high speed data communication in small areas such as building or an office. WLANs allow the user to move around in a confined area while they are connected to the network.

**Computer Network Architecture**

There are two main types of the computer network architecture:

- Peer-to-Peer Architecture: The Peers reffered to here are the individual devices linked together directly, having equal responsibilities and equal powers without the presence of any centralized server. Each device in the computer network can acts as both either client and server at the same time. Peer to peer network is useful for small environments which is usually upto 10 meters. Peer to Peer network has no dedicated servers and the resources are shared among the peers. For example, some companies uses peer to peer architecture to host the memory-consuming applications, such as the video editing software, 3-D graphic rendering, across multiple digital devices. This is very inexpensive to setup and maintain, but there is no requirement of the centralized server and this also ensures that in case of any failure in the network, all unaffected devices continue to operate normally. The peer to peer network is simple to setup and maintain, which allows each computers to run independently. The peer to peer network is not suitable for the large networks, as it is not scalable and it is difficult to manage.

- Client-Server Architecture: In this type of computer network, nodes can be servers or clients. The central server is known as the Server, and while all other computers in the network are clients. Here the servers performs all the major operations such as security and network management. The server nodes provide resources like memory, processing, power or data to client nodes. Server nodes may also control the behavior of the client nodes. The clients can communicate with each other only through the server, but they do not share the resources. For example, some computer devices in an enterprise network to store the data and the configuration settings. These devices are the server in the network. Client may access this data by making the request to the server. The data backup becomes easy in this type of network, as well as the security is also high due to being centralized. This client server architecture increases the speed of the sharing resources. The client server architecture is expensive to setup and maintain, but it is scalable and easy to manage.

**Network Topology**

A Network topology is the logical and physical arrangement of a network. Every topology comes with their own advantages and disadvantages. 

- Star Topology: Star topology is an arrangement of the network in which all the nodes are being connected to the central hub, switch or a central computer. The central hub or switch is responsible for the flow of data between the nodes. Here the central computer is also known as the Server and the other nodes are known as the clients. Hubs or switches are mainly used by the Star topology. It is efficient topology for the large networks, as it is easy to manage and troubleshoot the network issues. The star toplogy the troubleshooting becomes easy, as the failure of one node does not affect the other nodes. In star topology the complex network topology can be easily manage and any changes made in the star topology can be easily accomodated without affecting the other nodes. It is easily expandable as new stations can be added to the open ports of the hub or switch. Star topology is cost-effective as it uses the inexpensive co-axial table. This supports a bandwidth of approx 100 Mbps. Ethernet 100 BaseT is one of the most popualr star topology networks.

- Ring Topology: In the ring topology, the network devices are connected to each other in the form of a closed loop. Ring topology is more of like bus topology, but in ring topology the ends are connected to each other. In this topology the received message is being retransmitted by the next computer to the until it reaches the reciepient computer. In ring topology the data flows in one direction only i.e, bi-directional either clockwise or anti-clockwise. This kind of loop has no terminated ends which means the loop is endless and the data can flow continuously. The ring topology is easy to install and configure. The most common access method at the ring topology is the token passing, which token is passed from node to another node. It is a kind of frame which circulates around the network. In this topology the faulty device can be easily identified and removed. In ring topology the installation and configuration is not much very expensive. The ring topology is more reliable because the communication system does not depend on the single node. The failure of single node makes the whole network to fail and the delay in the network is directly proportional to the number of nodes in the network. 

- Bus Topology: In the bus topology, all the nodes are connected to a single cable can also be known as backbone cable. The data transmission that happens over the network, in one direction only. Each node whenever sends the message to the other node, the message is being broadcasted to all the nodes in the network, whether it has been addressed or not. The configuration of a bus topology is very simple and easy to install. The bus topology is very cost effective as it uses the inexpensive co-axial cable. The bus topology is very easy to expand, as the new nodes can be added to the existing cable without affecting the other nodes. The co-axial or twisted pair cables are mainly used in the bus topology which supports upto 10 Mbps. A failure of one node will not have any effect on the other nodes.

- Mesh Topology: In the mesh topology, each node is connected to the other nodes in the network through various redundant connections. There are multiple paths or way from one computer to another computer. This kind of network doesn't have the switch, hub or any kind of central computer that can act as central point of communication. Mesh topology is mainly used in for WAN implementation over the wireless medium of communication, where if the connection do fails or gets interrupted results into a critical concern. Mesh topology can be formed by using the formula:

Number of cables: (n*(n-1/2))

Where n is the number of nodes in the network.


- Hybrid Topology: The combination of the various topologies is called as hybrid topology. The hybrid topology is connected between different links and nodes to transfer the data from one node to another node. The hybrid topology is very flexible and reliable. The hybrid topology is very expensive to install and maintain as it requires the costly hardwares required by the different topologies. The size of network can be easily expanded by adding more devices and can be degraded by removing the devices without effecting the functionality of the existing infrastructure. The hybrid topology is very complex to design and implement. The hybrid topology is also very difficult to troubleshoot and manage.