*Java Program*

Java program is a collection of objects, and these objects communicate through method calls to each other.

*Class*

The class is a blueprint (plan) of the instance of a class (object). It can be defined as a template that describes the data and behavior associated with its instance.

Example:
```
Blueprint of the car is class.
```

*Object*

The object is an instance of a class. It is an entity that has behavior and state.

Example:
```
A Car is an object whose **States** are color, name, brand, etc.
Behavior: Running on the Road.
```

*Method*

The behavior of an object is the method.

Example:
```
The speedometer displays the speed of the car.
```

*Instance variables*

Every object has its own unique set of instance variables. The state of an object is an object is generally created by the values that are assigned to these instance variables.

Example: Steps to compile and run a java program in a console.
```

javac HelloWorld.java
java HelloWorld
```

**Syntax:**

*1. Comments in Java*

Comments are the statements which are not executed by the compiler but used to provide information to the programmer about the specific functionality of the program and make the program understandable.

Example:
```
Single line comment:

// This is a single line comment

Multi-line comment:

/* This is a
multi-line comment */

Documentation comment:

/**Documentation comment*/
```

*2. Source File Name*

The naming convention for a source file should be strictly followed. The name of the source file should be the same as the name of the public class or the name of the file can be different name if it does not contain any public class.

Example:
```
HELLOWORLD.java  //Valid Syntax
helloworld.java  //Invalid Syntax
```

*3. Case Sensitivity*

Java is a case sensitive language., which means that the identifiers AB, Ab, aB, and ab are all different in java.

Example:
```
System.out.println("Hello World");  //Valid Syntax
system.out.println("Hello World");  //Invalid Syntax
```

*4. Class Names*

i. The first letter of the class should be in Uppercase (lowercase is allowed, but not recommended).

ii. If several words are used to form the name of the class, each inner word's first letter should be in Uppercase. Underscores are allowed, but not recommended.

Example:
```
class MyJavaProgram //Valid Syntax
class 1Program      //Invalid Syntax
class My1Program    //Valid Syntax
class $Program      //Valid Syntax, but not recommended
class My$Program    //Valid Syntax, but not recommended (Inner class Program inside the class My)
class myJavaProgram //Valid Syntax, but not recommended
```

*5. public static void main (String args[])*

The main() method is the main entry point into a java program, this is where the processing starts. Also allowed is the signature public static void main (String... args).

*6. Method Names*

i. All the method names should start with a lowercase letter.

ii. If several words are used to make the name for the method, then each first letter of the inner word should be in Uppercase. Underscores are allowed, but not recommended. Also, allowed are digits and currency symbols.

Example:
```
public void myMethod(); //Valid Syntax
public void MyMethod(); //Valid Syntax, but not recommended
```

*7. Identifiers in Java*

Identifiers are the names given to local variables, instance and class variables and labels, but also the names for classes, packages, modules and methods.

i. All identifiers can begin with a letter, a currency symbol or an underscore (_). According to the naming convention, a letter should be lower case for variables.

ii. The first characters of the identifiers can be followed by any combination of Letters, digits, currency symbols and underscores. The underscore is not recommended for the names of variables. Constants are written in all capital letters.

iii. Most importantly, identifiers are case sensitive.

iv. A keyword cannot be used as an identifier since it is a reserved word and has some special meaning.

Example:
```
Legal Identifiers: MinNumber, total, ak47, hello_world, $amount, _under_value

Illegal Identifiers: 74ak, -amount
```

*8. White space in Java*

A line containing only white spaces, possibly with the comment, is known as a blank line and the java compiler completely ignores it.

Example:
```
public class HelloWorld {

   public static void main(String args[]) {

      // Prints "Hello, World" in the terminal window.

      System.out.println("Hello, World");

   }

}
```

*9. Access Modifiers*

These modifiers are used to control the scope of class and methods.

- Access Modifiers: default, public, private, protected

- Non-Access Modifiers: final, abstract, strictfp

*10. Understanding Access Modifiers*

<table>
<thead>
<tr>
<th>Access Modifier</th>
<th>Within Class</th>
<th>Within Package</th>
<th>Outside Package by Subclass</th>
<th>Outside Package</th>
</tr>
</thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>Private</td>
<td>Y</td>
<td>N</td>
<td>N</td>
<td>N</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Default</td>
<td>Y</td>
<td>Y</td>
<td>N</td>
<td>N</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Protected</td>
<td>Y</td>
<td>Y</td>
<td>Y</td>
<td>N</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Public</td>
<td>Y</td>
<td>Y</td>
<td>Y</td>
<td>Y</td>
</tr>
</tbody>
</table>

*11. Java Keywords*

Keywords or Reserved words are the words in a language that are used for some internal process or represent some predefined actions. These words are therefore not allowed to be used as variable names, objects, classname, method names or any other identifiers.