*Variable in Java*

Variable in java is a data container that stores the data values during java program execution. Every variable is assigned a data type which designates the type and quality of value it can hold. Variable is a memory location name of the data. 
The java variables have mainly three types: 
- 1. Local variable
- 2. Instance variable
- 3. Static variable

In order to use a variable in a program you need to perform two steps:
- 1. Declare the variable (Variable Declaration)
- 2. Initialize the variable (Variable Initialization)

*Variable Declaration*

Variable declaration is the process of defining the variable name and type. The variable declaration is done by using the variable type followed by the variable name. The variable declaration is done only once in the program. The variable declaration is done at the class level. To declare a variable, you must specify the data type of the variable and give the variable a name. The following example declares a variable named myNum of type int:

Example:
```
int myNum;
int a,b,c;
float pi;
double d;
char c;
```

*Variable Initialization*

To initialize a variable means to assign a valid value to the variable. The variable initialization is done by using the assignment operator (=). The variable initialization is done every time when the program is executed. The variable initialization is done at the class level. The following example initializes the variable myNum with the value 15:

Example:
```
// You can combine the both variable declaration and initialization in one line
int myNum = 15;

int a=2,b=4,c=6;

float pi=3.14f;

double d=20.22d;

char c='A';

// You can also declare and initialize the variable in different lines

float pi;
pi = 3.14f;

double do;
do = 20.22d;

char c;
c = 'A';

```

*Types of Variables*

There are three types of variables in java:

- 1. Local Variables

Local variables are a variable that are declared inside the body of a method. Local variables are created when the method is invoked and the variable will be destroyed once the method has completed. Local variables are visible only within the declared method, constructor, or block.

- 2. Instance Variables

Instance variables are defined without the STATIC Keyword. They are defined Outside a method declaration. They are object specific and are known as Instance Variables.

- 3. Static Variables

Static variables are initialized only once, at the start of the program execution. These variables should be initialized first, before the initialization of any instance variables. Static variables are declared using the static keyword. Static variables are mostly used for constant values such as PI, E, etc.

Example:
```
class Test {
    static int a = 1; // static variable
    int data = 2; // instance variable
    void method() {
        int b = 3; // local variable
    }
}
```

*Data Types in Java*

Data types in Java are defined as specifiers that allocate different sizes and types of values that can be stored in the variable or an identifier. Data types in java can be divided into two types:

- 1. Primitive Data Types: Which include integer, character, boolean and floating point types.
- 2. Non-Primitive Data Types: Which include Classes, Interfaces, and Arrays.

*Primitive Data Types*

Primitive data types are predefined and available in Java. There are eight primitive data types in Java. They are:

- Integer Data Type:
  - byte (1 byte)
  - short (2 bytes)
  - int (4 bytes)
  - long (8 bytes)
- Floating Data Type:
  - float (4 bytes)
  - double (8 bytes)
- Textual Data Type:
  - char (2 bytes)
- Boolean Data Type:
  - boolean (1 bit) (true or false)

Some things to consider for the same:
  - All numeric data types are signed (+/-).
  - The size of data types remain the same on all platforms (standardized).
  - Char data type in java is 2 bytes because it uses UNICODE character set.

*Java Variable Type Conversion and Type Casting*

A variable of one type can receive the value of another type. Here are the two cases:

Case 1) Variable of smaller capacity is be assigned to another variable of bigger capacity. This is called implicit conversion or widening conversion. For example, int to long, float to double, etc.

Example:
```
double d;
int i = 10;
d = i; // implicit conversion
```

This process is automatic and non-explicit is known as conversion.

Case 2) Variable of larger capacity is be assigned to another variable of smaller capacity. This is called explicit conversion or narrowing conversion. For example, long to int, double to float, etc.

Example:
```
double d = 10;
int i;
i = (int)d; // explicit conversion
```

In the case of explicit conversion, we have to explicitly specify the type cast operator (int). This process is called as type casting.

In case, you do not specify the type cast operator, the compiler will throw an error. Since this rule is enforced by the compiler, it makes the programmer aware that the conversion that is about to do may cause some loss in data and prevents accidental losses.