**Loops in Java**

In any programming language, loops are used to execute a block of code repeatedly.

There are three types of loops in Java:

1. For Loop: The java for loop is used to iterate a part of the program serveral times. If the number of iteration is fixed, it is recommended to use for loop.

2. While Loop: The java while loop is used to iterate a part of the program several times. If the number of iteration is not fixed, it is recommended to use while loop.

3. Do-While Loop: the java do-while loop is used to iterate a part of the program several times. Use it if the number of iteration is not fixed and you must have to execute the loop at least once.

**FOR LOOP**

1. *Java Simple For Loop*

- Initialization: It is the initial condition which is executed once when the loop starts. At this point you can initialize the variable, or we can use an existing variable.

- Condition: It is the second parameter which is executed each time to test the condition of the loop. It continues to execute until the condition becomes false. It must return boolean value i.e. either true or false.

- Increment/Decrement: It is the third parameter which is executed each time after the completion of the body of the loop. It is used to update the variable value.

- Statement: The statement of the loop is executed each time until the second condition becomes false.

Syntax:
```
for(initialization; condition; increment/decrement){
    //statement or code to be executed
}
```

2. *Java Nested for Loop*

If we have to execute a loop inside another for loop, it is known as nested for loop. The inner loop will be executed completely for each iteration of the outer loop.

3. *Java for-each Loop*

The for-each loop is used to traverse array or collection in java. It is easier to use than simple for loop because we don't need to increment value and use subscript notation.

Syntax:
```
for(data_type variable: array_name){
    //statement or code to be executed
}
```

4. *Java Labeled for Loop*

The labeled for loop is used to break or continue outer loop from inner loop. It is used when we have nested loops.

Syntax:
```
labelname;
for(initialization; condition; increment/decrement){
    //statement or code to be executed
}
```

5. *Java Infinitive for Loop*

If you use two semicolons ;; in the for loop, it will be infinitive for loop. It will be executed until we break or return from the loop.

Syntax:
```
for(;;){
    //statement or code to be executed
}
```

**WHILE LOOP**

1. *Java Simple While Loop*

The java while loop is used to iterate a part of the program repeatedly until the specified boolean condition is true. As soon as the boolean condition becomes false, the loop automatically terminates.

The whole loop is considered as a repeating if statement. If the number of iteration is not fixed, it is recommended to use while loop.

Syntax:
```
while(condition){
    //statement or code to be executed
}
```

2. *Java Infinitive While Loop*

If you use true as a condition in the while loop, it will be infinitive while loop.

Syntax:
```
while(true){
    //statement or code to be executed
}
```

**DO-WHILE LOOP**

1. *Java Simple Do-While Loop*

The java do-while loop is used to iterate a part of the program repeatedly until the specified condition is true.

Java do-while loop is called an exit control loop. It means that the condition is checked at the end of the loop. So, the loop will be executed at least once.

Syntax:
```
do{
    //statement or code to be executed
}while(condition);
```

2. *Java Infinitive Do-While Loop*

If you use true as a condition in the do-while loop, it will be infinitive do-while loop.

Syntax:
```
do{
    //statement or code to be executed
}while(true);
```