**Java Datastructures**

A datastructure is not just only used for organizing the data. Datastructures are also used for processing, retrieving and storing data. There are basic and advanced datastructures, out of that both are used in almos every program or software system that is needed to be developed.

**Classifications of Datastructures**

There are two classifications of datastructures, they are:

1. Linear Datastructures
    1.1. Static Datastructures
        1.1.1. Array
    1.2. Dynamic Datastructures
        1.2.1. Queue
        1.2.2. Stack
        1.2.3. Linked List
2. Non-Linear Datastructures
    2.1. Tree
    2.2. Graph

**Need of Datastructures**

1. Data structures modification is easy.
2. It requires less time.
3. Save storage memory space.
4. Data representation is easy.
5. Easy access to the large database.

**Linear Datastructures**

Data structures is that in which data elements are arranged sequentially or linearly, where each element is attached to its previous and next element is called a linear data structure. The elements are arranged in a linear fashion. (PS: Linear means straight line)

Examples of Linear Datastructures are: Array, Queue, Stack, Linked List, etc.

*Static Data Structures*

Static data structures has a fixed memory size. It is easier to access the elements in a static data structure.

Example of Static Data Structures are: Array

*Dynamic Data Structures*

It is the opposite of the static data structure here the size is not fixed. Dynamic data structure can be randomly updated during the program execution or runtime which may be considered efficient memory (space) complexity of the program.

Example of Dynamic Data Structures are: Queue, Stack, Linked List, etc.

**Non-Linear Datastructures**

Data structures where data elements are not placed sequentially or linearly are called non-linear data structures. The elements are arranged in a non-linear fashion. (PS: Non-Linear means not straight line), Which means in a non-linear data structure we can't traverse all the elements in a sequential manner.

Examples of Non-Linear Datastructures are: Tree, Graph, etc.


**Arrays**

An array is a linear data structure and it is a collection of similar type of data elements stored at contiguous memory locations. The idea is to store multiple items of the same type together in one place. This allows the processing of a large amount of data in a relatively small amount of time. The first element of the array is stored at the lowest address indexed by a subscript of 0. There are different operations possible in an array like searching, insertion, deletion, traversal, etc.

*Characteristics of an Array*

1. Arrays use an index-based data structure which helps to identify each of the elements in the array using that index.

2. If a user wants to store multiple values of same data type, then an array is the best choice.

3. An array can also handle complex data structures by storing data in a two dimensional array.

4. An array is also used to implement other data structures like stacks, queues, etc.

5. The search process in an array can be done very easily.

*Operations Performed on an Array*

1. Initialization: An array can be initialized with values at the time of declaration or later using an assignment statement.

2. Accessing Elements: Elements in an array can be accessed by their index, which starts from 0 and goes up to the size of the array minus 1.

3. Searching for Elements: An array can be searched for particular element using linear search or binary search algorithms.

4. Sorting Elements: Elements of an array can be sorted in ascending or descending order using algorithms like bubble sort, selection sort, insertion sort, etc.

5. Inserting Elements: Elements can be inserted in an array at a specific location but this operation can be time consuming because it requires shifting existing elements in the array.

6. Deleting Elements: Elements can be easily deleted from an array by shifting the elements that come after it to fill the gap.

7. Updating Elements: Elements in an arrya can be updated or modified by assigning a new value to a specific index.

8. Traversing Elements: The elements in an array can be traversed in order visiting each element exactly once.

*Applications of an Array*

- An array is used in solving matrix problems.

- Database records are also implemented by an array.

- It helps in implementing a sorting algorithm.

- An array can be used for CPU scheduling.

- Array can be applied as a lookup table in computers.

- An array is a best choice for implementing to a similar data type solutions

- It is used in image processing.

- It is also used in record management

- It is used in ordering boxes as well.

*Types of Arrays*

1. One Dimensional Array

2. Multi Dimensional Array

*Space Complexity*

The space complexity of an array is O(n) where n is the size of the array.

*Time Complexity*

The time complexity of an array is O(n) where n is the size of the array.
The time complexity of an array is O(n^2) for 2d arrays.

*Advantages of an Array*

- Arrays allow random access of elements. This makes accessing elements by position faster.

- Arrays have better cache locality that can make a pretty big difference in performance.

- Arrays are stored in contiguous memory locations. This makes it easier to iterate over the elements of an array.

**QUEUE**

A queue is defined as a linear data structure that is open at both ends and the operations are performed in First In First Out (FIFO) order. It is a collection of elements that are inserted and removed according to the First In First Out (FIFO) principle.

*Characteristics of a Queue*

1. Queue can handle multiple data types.

2. Queue can be accessed from both ends.

3. They are fast and flexible.

*FIFO principle of Queue*

- A queue is like a line waiting to purchase a ticket, where the first person in line is the first person in line is the first person served. (i.e., First come first serve)

- Position of the entry in a queue in a queue ready to be served, that is, the first entry that will be removed from the queue, is called the front of the queue (sometimes, head of the queue). Similarly, the position of the last entry in the queue, that is the one most recently added one, is called the rear (or the tail) of the queue.

*Queue Representation*

- Like stacks, Queues can also be represented in an array.

- Queue: The name of the array storing queue elements.

- Front: The index where the first element is stored in the array representing the queue.

- Rear: The index where the last element is stored in the array representing the queue.

*Creating Queue Objects*

Queue is an interface, objects cannot be created of the type queue. Instead, we need a class which extends this list in order to create an object of the queue type.

```
// Obj is the type of the object to be stored in Queue 
Queue<Obj> queue = new PriorityQueue<Obj> ();
```

*Operations Performed on a Queue*

1. Adding an element to the queue: In order to add an element in a queue, you can use the add() method. The element is added at the end of the queue. The insertion order is not retained in the priority queue.

2. Removing an element from the queue: In order to remove an element from a queue, you can use the remove() method. The element is removed from the front of the queue. Apart from that, poll() method is also used to remove the head and return it.

3. Iterating through the queue: In order to iterate through the queue, you can use the iterator() method. The iterator() method returns an iterator over the elements in the queue.

*Classes that implement the Queue Interface*

1. PriorityQueue

PriorityQueue class which is implemented in the collection framework which provides us a way to process the objects based on priority. It is known that a queue follows the First-In-First-Out algorithm, but sometimes the elements of the queue are needed to be processed according to the priority, that’s when the PriorityQueue comes into play. Let’s see how to create a queue object using this class.

2. Linked List

Linkedlist is a class which is implemented in the collection framework which inherently implements the linked list data structure. It is a linear data structure where the elements are not stored in contiguous locations and every element is a seperate object with a data part and address part. The elements are linked using pointers and addresses. Each element is known as node.

3. Priority Blocking Queue

<table>
<thead>
<tr>
<th>Method</th>
<th>Description</th>
</tr>
</thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>add(int index, element)</td>
<td>This method is used to add an element at a particular index in the queue. When a single parameter is passed, it simply adds the element at the end of the queue.</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>addAll(int index, Collection collection)</td>
<td>This method is used to add all the elements in the given collection to the queue. When a single parameter is passed, it adds all the elements of the given collection at the end of the queue.</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>size()</td>
<td>This method is used to return the size of the queue.</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>clear()</td>
<td>This method is used to remove all the elements of the queue.</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>remove()</td>
<td>This method is used to remove the element from the front of the queue.</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>remove(int index)</td>
<td>This method removes an element from the specified index. It shifts subsequent elements (if any) to left and decreases their indexes by 1.</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>remove(element)</td>
<td>This method is used to remove and return the first occurence of the given element in the queue.</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>get(int index)</td>
<td>This method returns elements at the specified index</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>set(int index, element)</td>
<td>This method replaces elements at a given index with the new element. The function returns the element which was just replaced by a new element.</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>indexOf(element)</td>
<td>This method returns the first occurrence of the given element or -1 if the element is not present in the queue</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>lastIndexOf(element)</td>
<td>This method returns the last occurence of the given element or -1 if the element is not present in the queue</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>equals(element)</td>
<td>This method is used to compare the equality of the given element with the elements in the queue.</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>hashCode()</td>
<td>This method is used to return the hashcode value of the given queue.</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>isEmpty</td>
<td>This method is used to check whether the queue is empty or not. It returns true if the queue is empty, else false.
</tr>
<tr>
<td>contains(element)</td>
<td>This method is used to check if the queue contains the given element or not. It returns the true if the queue is empty.</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>containsAll(Collection collection</td>
<td>This method is used to check if the queue contains all the collection of elements</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>sort(Comparator comp)</td>
<td>This method is used to sort the elements of the queue based on the data given Comparator.</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>boolean add(object)</td>
<td>This method is used to insert the specified element in the queue and return true upon success.</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>boolean offer(object)</td>
<td>This method is used to insert the specified element into the queue.</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Object poll()</td>
<td>This method is used to retrive and remove the head of the queue, or returns null if the queue is empty.</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Object element()</td>
<td>This method is used to retrives, but does not remove, the head of the queue.</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Object peek()</td>
<td>This method is used to retrives, but does not remove, the head of the queue or returns null if the queue is empty</td>
</tr>
</tbody>
</table>