**Hashing in Java**

Hashing is a process of mapping the keys and values to a hash table by using a hash function. It is done for the faster access of elements. The efficiency of mapping depends on the efficiency of the has function used. Using hashing in the process, you can easily store data in constant time and retrive them in constant time.

*Components of Hashing*

- Key: A key can be anything string or integer which is used to map the value to the hash table. It also determines an index or location in the storage of an item in data structure.

- Hash Function: The hash function receives the input key and returns the index of an element in an array called a hash table. The index is also known as hash index.

- Hash Table: The hash table is an array that maps keys to the values using a special function called a hash function. Hash stores the data in an associative manner in an array where each value has its own unique index.

Note: It is more like an array but array works on the index number whereas hash table works on the key. It is just like a dictionary where you can find the meaning of a word by using the word as a key i.e. the word is the key and the meaning is the value i.e. the value is mapped to the key i.e. data stored on the hard disk is stored in the form of key-value pairs.

*Hash Function*

The hash function creates a mapping between key and value, which is done using the mathematical formulas known as hash functions. The result of the hash function is reffered to a hash value or hash. The hash value is a representation of the original string of characters but usually smaller than the original string stored.

*Types of Hash Functions*

1. Division Method: This is the most simple method to generate a hash value. It is done by taking the remainder of the division of the key value by the size of the hash table and then using the remainder as the index of the hash table.

```
Formula: hash(key) = key % size of hash table
```

It is best suited for the size of the hash table is a prime number, as that can make sure the keys are distributed evenly across the hash table. The hash function totally depends over the remainder of division of the key by the size of the hash table.
Example:

```
key = 123456
size of hash table = 95
h(123456) = 123456 % 95 = 56
```

```
key = 1276
size of hash table = 11
h(1276) = 1276 % 11 = 0
```

Advantages: It is very simple to implement and it is very fast and it is suitable for any value of M(Size of hash table).

Disadvantages: It is not suitable for the size of the hash table is not a prime number.

2. Mid Square Method: This method is used to generate a hash value by squaring the value of the key i.e. k^2 and then taking the middle digits of the result as hash value.

```
Formula: hash(key) = hash size(kxk)
here k is the key
```

Example: Think that hash table has 100 memory locations. So r=2, because 2 digits are required to map the key to the memory location.

```
k=60
kxk=60*60
    =3600
h(60)=60
The hash value obtained is 60.
```

Advantages: The performance of this method is good for almost or all digits of the key value contribute to the hash value. This is because all the digits in the key value contribute to generating the middle digits of the squared result. The result is not dominated by the distribution of the top digit or bottom digit of the key value.

Disadvantages: The size of the key is one of the limitations of this method, as the key is of big size then its square will double the number of digits. Another limitation is that there will be collisions but we can try to reduce them.

3. Digit Folding Method: This method is comprised of two steps:
    i. Divide the key-value (k) into a number of parts i.e. k1, k2, k3, and kn. Where each part has the same number of digits except for the last part that can have lesser digits than the other parts.
    ii. Add the Individual parts together to get the hash value.

```
Formula: 
k = k1 + k2 + k3 + k4 + ... + kn
s = k1 + k2 + k3 + k4 + ... + kn
h(k) = s
here
"s" is obtained by adding the parts of the key value.
```

Example:
```
k = 123456789
k1 = 12, k2 = 34, k3 = 56, k4 = 78, k5 = 9
s = 12 + 34 + 56 + 78 + 9 = 189
h(k) = 189
```

The number of the digits in each part is determined by the size of the hash table. For example: the size of the hash table is 100, then each part must have 2 digits except for the last part that can have a lesser number of digits.

4. Multiplication Method: This method comprises of multiple steps:
    - Choose a constant value A such that 0<A<1.
    - Multiply the key value by A.
    - Extract the fractional part of the kA.
    - Multiply the result of the above step by the size of the hash table.
    - The resulting hash value is obtained by taking the floor of the result of the above step.
```
Formula:
h(k) = floor (M (kA mod 1))
here,
M = size of the hash table
k = key value
A = constant value
```

Example:
```
k=12345
A=0.594969
M=100
h(12345)= floor[100(12345*0.594969 mod 1)]
        = floor[100(7344.892 mod 1)]
        = floor[100(0.892)]
        = floor[89.2]
h(12345)= 89
```

Advantage: The biggest advantage of this method is that it can work with any value between 0 and 1, although there are some values that tend to give better resuls than others.

Disadvantage: The biggest disadvantage of this method is that, it is mostly suitable when the table size is a power of 2, then the whole process of computing the index by the key using multiplication hashing is very fast.

*A good Hash Function*

A good hash function should have the following properties:
- Efficiently Computable
- Should Uniformly distribute the keys
- Should be able to handle collisions
- Should have a low load factor

*Complexity of calculating hash value using the hash function*

- Time Complexity: 0(n)
- Space Complexity: 0(1)

*Problem with Hashing*

If we carefully observe the hash function, we can say that for different strings same hash value can be obtained. 

*Collision*

The whole process of hashing creates a small numbers for a big key, so there is a possibility that two keys could produce the same hash value. The situation where the newly inserted key maps to an already occupied and it must be handled using some collision handling technology.

*How to handle collisions?*

- **Seperate Chaining:** The idea is to make each cell of the hash table point to a linked list of records that have the same hash function value. Chaining is simple, but requires additional memory outside the table. Each of the pointers in the hash table is called a bucket.

Example:
```
Hash Function: key % 5
Element: 12, 15, 22, 25 and 37
```

1. Firstly let make a blank hash table of size 5, i.e. from 0 to 4.

2. Now we will insert the elements one by one in the hash table, using the hash function to get the index of the hash table where the element will be inserted.
```
12 % 5 = 2

_ _ 12 _ _
^ ^ ^  ^ ^
0 1 2 3 4
```

3. Now we will insert the next element in the hash table.
```
15 % 5 = 0
22 % 5 = 2
as mentioned in last step we can see the index 2 is already occupied by 12, so we will insert the element in the hash table at index 2 .
     22
     ||
     VV
15 _ 12 _ _
^  ^ ^  ^ ^
0  1 2  3 4
```

4. Now the next key is 25, so we will insert it in the hash table.
```
25 % 5 = 0
as mentioned in last step we can see the index 0 is already occupied by 15, so we will insert the element in the hash table at index 0 .
25   22
||   ||
VV   VV
15 _ 12 _ _
^  ^  ^ ^ ^
0  1  2 3 4
```
Similarly we will insert the next element in the hash table.
```
37 % 5 = 2
as mentioned in last step we can see the index 2 is already occupied by 12, so we will insert the element in the hash table at index 2 .
     37
     ||
25   22
||   ||
VV   VV
15 _ 12 _ _
^  ^  ^ ^ ^
0  1  2 3 4
```

5. Here the seperating chaining will handle the situation of collision and will create the linked list at the index where the collision occurs.

- **Open Addressing:** The idea is to use the hash function to generate another hash value, if an element is already present at the index generated by the hash function. This process is repeated until we find an empty slot.

a. Linear Probing

In this method, the hash table is searched sequentially which starts from the location of the hash. If in case, the location is already occupied, then the next location is checked. This process is repeated until an empty slot is found.

Algorithm:
```
1. Calculate the hash key i.e. key = data % size

2. Check for, if hashTable[key] is empty or not.
    Store the value directly by **hashTable[key]=data** if it is empty.

3. If the hashTable[key] is not empty.
    Then check for the next location by **key = (key+1) % size**.

4. Check for the next location until an empty slot is found.
```

Example:
```
Hash Function: key % 5

Element: 12, 15, 22, 25 and 37

1. Firstly let make a blank hash table of size 5, i.e. from 0 to 4 or according to the hash function provided.

2. Insert element one by one into the hash table
    The first key is 50, so we will insert it in the hash table.
    12 % 5 = 2

    _ _ 12 _ _
    ^ ^  ^ ^ ^
    0 1  2 3 4

3. Now we will insert the next element in the hash table.
    15 % 5 = 0
    22 % 5 = 2
    considering the condition, location is already occupied so as mentioned in the algorithm we will check for the next location by key = (key+1) % size.
    23 % 5 = 3

    15 _ 12 23 _
    ^  ^  ^  ^ ^
    0  1  2  3 4

4. Now the next key is 25, so we will insert it in the hash table.
    25 % 5 = 0
    considering the condition, location is already occupied so as will do as mentioned in the algorithm we will check for the next location by key = (key+1) % size.
    26 % 5 = 1

    15 26 12 23 _
     ^  ^  ^  ^ ^
     0  1  2  3 4

5. Now the next key is 37, so we will insert it in the hash table.
    37 % 5 = 2
    considering the condition, location is already occupied so as will do as mentioned in the algorithm we will check for the next location by key = (key+1) % size.
    38 % 5 = 3
    same as before we will check for the next location by key = (key+1) % size.
    39 % 5 = 4

    15 26 12 23 39
     ^  ^  ^  ^  ^
     0  1  2  3  4

```

b. Quadratic Probing

This method is the an open addressing scheme for the collision handling. In this method, Quadratic probing is used to take the original hash value and adding successive values of an arbitrary quadratic polynomial until an empty slot is found.

Example of sequence using Quadratic Probing:
```
H + 1^2, H + 2^2, H + 3^2, H + 4^2, H + 5^2,................, H + k^2
```
This method is also kwown as the mid-square method because it uses we look for the i^2 th probe in the i'th iteration and where the value of i=0,1,2,3.....n-1. We always start from the original location. If only the location is occupied, then we check the other slots.

Let hash(x) be the slot index computed using the hash function and n be the size of the hash table.

Algorithm:
```
if the slot hash(x) %n is full, then we try (hash(x) + 1^2) % n.

if (hash(x) + 1^2) % n is also full, then we try (hash(x) + 2^2) % n.

if (hash(x) + 2^2) % n is also full, then we try (hash(x) + 3^2) % n.

and so on, till we find an empty slot.
```
